---
title: "That Modelling Algorithm on the CV"
date: "2024-05-20"
author: "Sanghasheela Kamble"
summary: "A good data scientist combines technical skills, domain knowledge, and storytelling to deliver impactful analytics solutions, often relying on exploratory data analysis as much as machine learning models. Successful data science projects require aligning analytics with business problems and engaging with various business teams to ensure the solutions drive competitive advantage and revenue growth."
---

Life is a break between two deaths. Building a machine learning model is a break from data exploration. I am not implying that data exploration is scary, like death, while model building is complete with life. I am just saying that we have spent more time dead than alive. Technical prowess is essential to being a good data scientist. Domain knowledge and story-telling are also crucial. Technical skills encapsulate expertise in statistical concepts, programming, visualisation, and machine learning. Nowadays, a good data scientist knows Generative AI apart from everything else.

A model that does not solve a business problem well but is used frequently to comply with the pressure of adopting analytics is like a cancer to business. On the other hand, a model that recommends well but is not used enough by users due to a lack of sensitisation to the benefits of analytics is a loss of opportunity. Either way, data does not play the pivotal role it should play in giving a competitive advantage to the organisation. Data science is not machine learning (training the model) alone. It includes all activities from understanding the business problem to finally implementing and monitoring the solution in the production environment. The outcome of this exercise should be an end-to-end solution that should flourish in tandem with other existing IT applications.

Attributing revenue growth to an analytics solution alone is very tricky. One must be careful to eliminate all other possible revenue boosters in that case. Converting a business problem statement to an analytics problem statement is equally tricky. For example, let us say that the business problem is that the organisation’s revenue has decreased consistently over the last four years. For the moment, assume the scope of the problem statement, such as which products are hit, over what timeline, and to what extent of decline.

What could be the various possible analytics statements? 1) Identify high-potential products that the sales team can focus on, 2) Identify high-potential prospects that the marketing team could target with their customised and personalised campaigns, 3) How much to spend on which channel for best returns, 4) Forecast subsequent quarter sales and alert with recommendations, and 5) Predict ticket resolution time and use that for proactive communication to improve customer experience. The above options need to be discussed with business stakeholders. One or more of them should be selected to build a solution on. Each option above has a unique way of increasing revenue. We must quantify the impact of each of the five solutions on revenue and then pick up the top two or three solutions by discussing them with the business teams. Remember that all five solutions need not cater to the same business team, which means five different teams can come forward simultaneously and show an interest. The first solution might interest the sales team. The second and third ones could be for the marketing team. The fourth one will benefit the supply chain team. The fifth one will relate to the service assurance team. Ranking the solutions with respect to their impact on the overall business and ease of implementation will help prioritise.

Training a model is not a mandatory activity in a data science project. You will often encounter situations where an exploratory data analysis (EDA) alone can provide the necessary insights. When the business team uses the insight to solve their problem, it becomes an elegant analytics solution. One must keep this in mind even though we love to see the long list of modelling algorithms on the CV. If you have already decided to lose the algorithm and include the solution on your CV by now, I will not mind.
